---
title: "The Books I Read in 2023"
description: "A brief review of the books I read in 2023"
date: 2024-01-02T23:21:38+01:00
tags:
  - books
keywords: lucapette, books
images:
  - cover.jpg
---

Last here I decided to write a few words about all the books I had read in the
previous 12 months. It was fun to write and was well-received so I decided to
take notes about the books I read in 2023 as the year went by to ease writing
this year edition.

I'm very glad I did so because I read 85 books in 2023 and it would have taken
me a while to write every review from scratch.

A few notes about my reading in 2023 before the reviews.

While I was writing the 2022 edition of this article I had the depressing
realization my list contained way too many men. So, in 2023, I decided to
actively default to women in my selection process which lead me to read 62 books
written by women. The take away here is that paying attention to this felt
effortless. I didn't struggle one second which makes me feel guilty for not
paying any attention to this _so far_. Also, curious to see what I'll write her
next year about this.

A few books are marked as "top books" and I thought I'd explain what I mean by
this since it's clearly a personal definition. Top books are those books that
alter my conscious view of the wold. The way I often describe any of these
books (using one I read years ago): there's a before you read "salt fat acid
heat" and after you read it. Meaning I can tell I'm a different person after I
read said book, often even a better person.

Final note is that this article word count is obscene so I don't expect _anyone_
to read it all. If you actually do so, please tell me. I'll make me go ðŸ¤¯

## Walkaway

{{< book id="40604388" title="Walkaway" name="walkaway.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was my first Cory Doctorow book so I had no idea what to expect. After 50
pages or so I was confused: there was very little going on, it was mostly people
talking to each other. I don't like lack of plot development but here I was
loving it. The conversations were too interesting. Also, it turns out it was
just a slow starting plot. The story picked up some pace after 100 pages or so
and developed into an intriguing plot with a good ending. It left me lots to
think about.

{{</ book >}}

## The space between words

{{< book id="61224687" title="The Space Between Worlds" name="the-space-between-worlds.jpg" width="200" >}}

A slow start but the book kept getting better and better. Two things really
stand out for me:

- It's an original story despite the well-known multiverse plot device.
- The writing is very good, clear, and simple. A few descriptions shocked me for
  their efficacy and brevity.

OK, I lied. One more thing: it made me want to write in the multiverse setup.
Pretty sure I have enough unfinished writing projects though ðŸ™ƒ

{{</ book >}}

## Station eleven

{{< book id="23593321" title="Station Eleven"
name="station-eleven.jpg" width="200" >}}

This book is perfect to me.

In the first pages, the writing is very good but feels a little stiff, maybe a
tad too formal. Then it just keeps getting better and everything flows. The pace
is perfect throughout the whole book.

Mandel develops the plot masterfully. She gives you almost enough to connect the
dots but leaves out just enough to still surprise you when you do connect them.

I will think about this book for a very long time.

**Top book.**

The TV series is also very worthy of your time. It makes two structural changes
to the plot development. I loved one, I hated the other. All in all a great
adaptation.

{{</ book >}}

## The glass hotel

{{< book id="52238882" title="The Glass Hotel"
name="the-glass-hotel.jpg" width="200" >}}

I impulse-bought this book because of Station eleven (ðŸ‘†). I loved the first 200
pages but got a little bored with the plot development toward the end. I felt
that Mandel spent too much time on an aspect of the story I had only considered
tangential. Basically, the rest of plot was much more interesting.

Lovely touch that characters overlap with Station eleven. It's not forced. It's
not in your face. A testament of how delicate and elegant Mandel's writing is.

{{</ book >}}

## The time traveler's wife

{{< book id="18619684" title="The Time Traveler's Wife" name="the-time-travelers-wife.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was a strange read. I enjoyed the writing very much. There are two
narrators in the book (the time traveler and his wife) and the execution is
fantastic. So this had everything to be a perfect book.

But I found myself not engaged with the story at all. Maybe I just need too much
of "what happens" next? I can't tell if it's my expectations or the book really
didn't have enough plot.

{{</ book >}}

## Black sun

{{< book id="50892360" title="Black Sun" name="black-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}

Every now and then I try a fantasy book. I can't say I'm fond of the genre but
that says more about me than about this book. In fact, this is well written.

I enjoyed the unfolding of the story and the character development. If you're
into fantasy, I would assume you'd like this.

{{</ book >}}

## Too like the lightning

{{< book id="26114545" title="Too Like the Lightning" name="too-like-the-lightning.jpg" width="200" >}}

Painful read. I couldn't get myself to finish it which almost never happens. I
couldn't connect with a plot that, on paper, I should have loved. The writing
was unnerving and distracting.

{{</ book >}}

## First person singular

{{< book id="57292255" title="Prima persona singolare" name="prima-persona-singolare.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in italian)

Murakami is one of my favourite novelists. I say novelist because I mean to
underline that's what I like about him. I love his novels but I can't stand his
short stories. I read this one because it was really short (I read it in two
sittings in the same day). As expected, it disappointed me.

There may be the wrong expectations at play here. I blame Dino Buzzati and his
magnificent [Sessanta
racconti](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/216019.Sessanta_racconti). Ever
since I read that, I expect short stories to be memorable. This collection has
none of that.

{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary justice

{{< book id="17333324" title="Ancillary Justice" name="ancillary-justice.jpg" width="200" >}}

40 pages into the first book of the series, I could already tell why Ancillary
Justice won all the awards.

In general awards are not a signal for me (I'm looking at you academy awards)
but winning all major sci-fi awards (never happened before or after) with a
debut had to mean something good.

In fact, this book has everything. Plot development is perfectly executed. The
writing is masterful and the characters are interesting. Highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary sword

{{< book id="20706284" title="Ancillary Sword" name="ancillary-sword.jpg" width="200" >}}

So different from the first book (ðŸ‘†) and yet almost as good.

The plot didn't feel as interesting as Ancillary Justice but I think this says
more about Justice than Sword.

Ann Leckie writing is way too good!

{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary mercy

{{< book id="23533039" title="Ancillary Mercy" name="ancillary-mercy.jpg" width="200" >}}

A perfect ending to an amazing series. The alien character is exquisitely...
alien.

I look forward to more books in the same universe.

{{</ book >}}

## All systems red

{{< book id="32758901" title="All Systems Red" name="all-systems-red.jpg" width="200" >}}

I've been meaning to read this series for a while since lots of people rave
about it. So maybe I had the wrong expectations going in.

It's fun but there's not enough context around the story to keep me engaged.
Easy read anyway since it's pretty short. I'm sure I would have abandoned it if
it had the avg sci-fi book word count.

{{</ book >}}

## Artificial condition

{{< book id="36223860" title="Artificial Condition" name="artificial-condition.jpg" width="200" >}}

I loved the pace of Artificial Condition.

The plot also felt much more interesting than All systems red. It convinced me
to keep going!

{{</ book >}}

## Rogue protocol

{{< book id="35519101" title="Rogue Protocol" name="rogue-protocol.jpg" width="200" >}}

Rogue Protocol confused me. The plot wasn't clear to me. I did grew to like the
main character very much though.

{{</ book >}}

## Exit strategy

{{< book id="35519109" title="Exit Strategy" name="exit-strategy.jpg" width="200" >}}

I got tired of the series. I constantly had questions about the context in which
the plot itself developed so I couldn't connect with it.

I suppose you either undefined context or don't. I definitely don't.

Looking forward to the TV adaptation though.

{{</ book >}}

## The Martian

{{< book id="18007564" title="The Martian" name="the-martian.jpg" width="200" >}}

I've been meaning to read this for a while because I like the movie adaptation.
As always, the book is better.

Andy Weir creates good stories and his writing is engaging and entertaining.

Too bad The Martian is littered with bro jokes. It didn't ruin it but it was a
close call.

{{</ book >}}

## Kindred

{{< book id="38190066" title="Kindred" name="kindred.jpg" width="200" >}}

Going in, I thought I knew how though a read Kindred would be but it still
caught me off guard.

An absolute masterpiece.

The writing is so crude, so real. I felt I was there with Dana the whole time
seeing the actual madness of slavery through the eyes of a modern day person.
Life changing book.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## Termination shock

{{< book id="59663279" title="Termination Shock" name="termination-shock.jpg" width="200" >}}

Mixed feelings. I don't mind long books as long as there's enough plot
development. Termination shock is hit and miss.

On one side, I got through 400 pages in a short time, on the other the remaining
300 felt slow.

Having said that, a must-read for cli-fi aficionado.

{{</ book >}}

## The power

{{< book id="29751398" title="The Power" name="the-power.jpg" width="200" >}}

Strange book.

I liked the first third, found the second third slow and "stitched together" and
loved most of the last third.

The core idea is very intriguing but the writing didn't work for me.

I enjoyed the TV adaptation.

{{</ book >}}

## Bloodchild

{{< book id="60930" title="Bloodchild and Other Stories" name="bloodchild-and-other-stories.jpg" width="200" >}}

Another masterpiece by Butler.

The stories are so interesting! The writing is perfect (I'm getting the feeling
that's a standard with Butler).

I love the edition I got (linked in the cover here) since it has a short
afterword for each story by the author herself. This edition has two fantastic
writing essays at the end. Wonderful.

Bloodchild doesn't feel like a collection of short stories. They feel more like
"mini-novels". What I'm trying to say is that these short tales are so rich of
ideas their scope is not as small as their word count.

{{</ book >}}

## Provenance

{{< book id="25353286" title="Provenance" name="provenance.jpg" width="200" >}}

Intricate, beautifully developed plot in the same universe as the ancillary
series (often referred as Imperial Radch series).

Ann Leckie is way too good at making aliens speak to humans.

{{</ book >}}

## Donguri shimai

{{< book id="40668314" title="Le sorelle Donguri" name="le-sorelle-donguri.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

There's something about the way Banana Yoshimoto writes I can't resist.

The main character in "Le sorelle Donguri" is talking to the reader but it's not
so obvious. It's a delicate, slow conversation. Love this style despite there's
not much plot development.

{{</ book >}}

## Americanah

{{< book id="58522291" title="Americanah" name="americanah.jpg" width="200" >}}

Americanah is in a genre I call "about love but not really. But yes, love". And
speaking of love, I loved everything about it: Ifemelu... what a character, the
slow but always moving plot, the deliberate non-linear story telling.

Adichie is an incredible writer and I'm grateful impulse-bought this book when I
came across it.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## China in ten words

{{< book id="12884314" title="China in Ten Words" name="china-in-ten-words.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read it in Italian)

I love the way You Hua writes. No matter the subject I enjoy his way. So it's
not surprising I loved China in ten words as well.

My favourite word, also unsurprising, is "writing". Among the most beautiful
"writing about writing" I have ever read.

{{</ book >}}

## 10000 light-years from home

{{< book id="52692608" title="Ten Thousand Light" name="ten-thousand-light.jpg" width="200" >}}

I tried really hard to finish 10000 light-years from home but really couldn't. I
couldn't connect with the writing in any way. I read the words but they had no
meaning for me. The worst read of the year.

{{</ book >}}

## The vanishing half

{{< book id="55298625" title="The Vanishing Half" name="the-vanishing-half.jpg" width="200" >}}

It was a bit of a slow start but it got better and better. An amazing plot,
intricate and delicate.

{{</ book >}}

## The long way to a small angry planet

{{< book id="25786523" title="The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet" name="the-long-way-to-a-small-angry-planet.jpg" width="200" >}}

Easy and entertaining read. I grew quite fond of Ohan, one of the aliens.

{{</ book >}}

## A closed and common orbit

{{< book id="29475447" title="A Closed and Common Orbit" name="a-closed-and-common-orbit.jpg" width="200" >}}

Again a very fun read. I liked it even more than The long way to a small, angry
planet.

Same universe, very little overlap. I Loved how Chambers developed two
storylines, really creative approach.

{{</ book >}}

## Record of a spaceborn few

{{< book id="32802595" title="Record of a Spaceborn Few" name="record-of-a-spaceborn-few.jpg" width="200" >}}

This is the weakest of the series so far.

I liked the structure: lots of characters, not much overlap. But the stories
didn't pull me in, they were just not interesting enough.

{{</ book >}}

## Sea of tranquility

{{< book id="123639782" title="Sea of Tranquility" name="sea-of-tranquility.jpg" width="200" >}}

An incredibly well-crafted time travel story.

Mandel's writing style is superb. She's the writer I wish I was.

I read Sea of tranquility in two sittings only over the span of a single day.
Now I'm trying to forget as much as possible so I can just read it again. And
again.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## Half of a yellow sun

{{< book id="35451559" title="Half of a Yellow Sun" name="half-of-a-yellow-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}

"War is very ugly".

What an incredible journey, what a writer!

Adichie, much as Dostoevsky and Ferrante, doesn't write characters. The depth of
her writing creates people. They're real to you when you're reading Half of a
yellow sun.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## To be taught, if fortunate

{{< book id="48657666" title="To Be Taught, If Fortunate" name="to-be-taught-if-fortunate.jpg" width="200" >}}

Short but very rich of ideas. Chambers writing is always entertaining.

{{</ book >}}

## Africa is not a country

{{< book id="61403413" title="Africa Is Not a Country" name="africa-is-not-a-country.jpg" width="200" >}}

Very well written. It's an infuriating read, obviously. Highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## The city & the city

{{< book id="39710105" title="The City & The City" name="the-city--the-city.jpg" width="200" >}}

Very original and intriguing story. The writing didn't pull me in though.

I often find "detective stories" not engaging. I think it's a matter of pace and
can't tell if it's the writers' fault. Probably not. I blame Conan Doyle.

{{</ book >}}

## To kill a mockingbird

{{< book id="8045416" title="To Kill a Mockingbird" name="to-kill-a-mockingbird.jpg" width="200" >}}

To kill a mockingbird didn't do it for me. Maybe it's the perspective from which
the story is told. I can't really tell. Maybe my expectations were too high so
it feel short of that.

{{</ book >}}

## The memory librarian

{{< book id="58677491" title="The Memory Librarian" name="the-memory-librarian.jpg" width="200" >}}

I liked two stories out of five. There's nothing wrong with the rest but the
writing didn't do it for me.

It felt like standing in front of a great picture that is slightly out of focus.
You can tell it's great but you're also disappointed it could have been much
better!

{{</ book >}}

## Semiosis

{{< book id="35018907" title="Semiosis" name="semiosis.jpg" width="200" >}}

A very intriguing take on "first contact" and alien life forms. I also enjoyed
the way Semiosis is structured: every chapter has a different narrator and
there's always a time jump between chapters. I had to adjust to this approach
but, after a couple of chapters, I really liked the idea I had small things to
put together myself.

I've had a similar experience with a different plot device in [World war
Z](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/8908.World_War_Z). It feels nice to have
to put together things on your own. I guess there's a risk you can overdo it and
tire the reader though.

{{</ book >}}

## Interference

{{< book id="43263202" title="Interference" name="interference.jpg" width="200" >}}

The follow up to Semiosis and I liked Interference even more.

The flow here is smoother. Maybe it's just that the time jumps are shorter, I
can't tell.

{{</ book >}}

## The terraformers

{{< book id="60784471" title="The Terraformers" name="the-terraformers.jpg" width="200" >}}

Three stories, two time jumps. Lots of amazing characters. Maybe they're not as
developed as the plot but all in all a very enjoyable book.

{{</ book >}}

## Purple hibiscus

{{< book id="37785879" title="Purple Hibiscus" name="purple-hibiscus.jpg" width="200" >}}

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie is an incredible writer so it makes sense her debut is
magnificent.

The writing is not as potent as her later work but you can tell she's going to
get there.

The plot of Purple hibiscus develops so softly that I must believe it's an
intentional opposition to the trauma and violence you are reading. Imagine
pulling that off with a debut!

{{</ book >}}

## Parable of the sower

{{< book id="41161349" title="Parable of the Sower" name="parable-of-the-sower.jpg" width="200" >}}

The thing about post-apocalyptic worlds is that they always feel pretty far so
the detachment makes reading them somewhat entertaining.

Parable of the sower doesn't work like that. Two reasons:

- Octavia E. Butler is in a league of her own. Her writing is so potent, crude,
  real.
- The world she describes feels close, way too close to our world. How short the
  distance between this hell and our world is so small, it's really fucking
  scary.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## Parable of the talents

{{< book id="46159606" title="Parable of the Talents" name="parable-of-the-talents.jpg" width="200" >}}

If possible, this is even better than Parable of the sower.

Same reasons as the first book: it's really really scary how close this hell
feels to our day to day reality. We're one step away from hell and she knew it
30 years ago.

The way I talk about the parable series is this:

> Octavia E. Butler isn't writing sci-fi. She's documenting the future.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## This is how you lose the time war

{{< book id="41093489" title="This Is How You Lose the Time War" name="this-is-how-you-lose-the-time-war.jpg" width="200" >}}

Every now and then I come across a book that I don't understand at all and I
can't connect to it in any way. This is how you lose the time war was one such
book.

I managed to read it in one day because it's very short but I found it painful
nonetheless.

{{</ book >}}

## Translation state

{{< book id="62873911" title="Translation State" name="translation-state.jpg" width="200" >}}

Ann Leckie doesn't know how to write bad books.

Translation state has three main characters. Each chapter follows a different
character and uses a different POV. I loved every page.

It's entertaining and weird. That's a compliment: a great gook about aliens must
be weird!

{{</ book >}}

## The thing around your neck

{{< book id="34397251" title="The Thing Around Your Neck" name="the-thing-around-your-neck.jpg" width="200" >}}

Chimamanda Ngoci Adichie is a master of the craft.

As a fan, I was a little worried about a a collection of short stories. I very
rarely like those. But Adichie isn't your average writer.

Each story has a unique voice. All of them are intriguing. I loved all of them
and will re-read for sure.

{{</ book >}}

## Yellowface

{{< book id="59357120" title="Yellowface" name="yellowface.jpg" width="200" >}}

Great pace. A real page-turner. Kuang makes it all look easy to deal with.

Yellowface flows at incredible speed and I just wanted to know where it was going
page after page.

She is such a good writer you're going to sympathise with the villain of the
story.

{{</ book >}}

## The shadow king

{{< book id="43726511" title="The Shadow King" name="the-shadow-king.jpg" width="200" >}}

I could not connect with the writing at all. I had trouble finishing it to be
honest.

A real bummer as the first pages were so captivating (which is why I bought it
in the first place).

{{</ book >}}

## Tomorrow tomorrow and tomorrow

{{< book id="59350163" title="Tomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow" name="tomorrow-and-tomorrow-and-tomorrow.jpg" width="200" >}}

What an incredible journey. The first few pages felt a little strange. Too many
big words, I was afraid I was going to hate the writing style. But it was just
an impression.

The quality of the writing quickly improved to the highest standard. I loved the
plot development. The author is a master at that. I also loved the main
characters, the way they're so different from each other but obviously
connected. I enjoyed my own nostalgia for the early days of gaming.

{{</ book >}}

## How high we go in the dark

{{< book id="69706993" title="How High We Go in the Dark" name="how-high-we-go-in-the-dark.jpg" width="200" >}}

I enjoyed the first third of How high we go in the dark very much (despite the
very triggering content) but then it kept getting less interesting. By the last
third, I was totally disengaged.

{{</ book >}}

## The secret history

{{< book id="70897" title="The Secret History" name="the-secret-history.jpg" width="200" >}}

The secret history found me. I was in a bookshop with a close friend (ðŸ‘‹ Sam!),
he picked it up and said "I read this some 20 years ago and I still remember
it". His statement intrigued me because he's an avid reader. Two days after
that, I was listening to Emily St. John Mandel talking about her writing process
and she mentioned Donna Tartt. I love these little signs. I had to read it!

I appreciate these signs even more when the book turns out to be a masterpiece.
Make no mistake: the secret history is an absolute masterpiece.

Donna Tartt has this magical ability to keep you busy reading while describing
incredibly detailed scenes.

The level of detail is just unreal. The plot is very very intense and the
writing sustains that intensity with its quality.

I **loved** every page.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## Redshirts

{{< book id="13055592" title="Redshirts" name="redshirts.jpg" width="200" >}}

The "usual" very entertaining writing of Scalzi. The plot didn't do it for me
this time though.

{{</ book >}}

## A bigger picture

{{< book id="56817598" title="A Bigger Picture" name="a-bigger-picture.jpg" width="200" >}}

Interesting and depressing (not the author's fault of course). I did not find
the writing very engaging but I enjoyed it nonetheless. It's a quick read.

{{</ book >}}

## Pachinko

{{< book id="34051011" title="Pachinko" name="pachinko.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was quite an incredible journey spanning almost a 100 years.

I loved this story. It surprised me, it pained me, it had me interested every
single page.

It also thought me a piece of history I was completely unaware of. What can you
ask more of a book?

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## Lock in

{{< book id="21418013" title="Lock In" name="lock-in.jpg" width="200" >}}

Average John Scalzi book: extremely entertaining, highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Head on

{{< book id="35018901" title="Head On" name="head-on.jpg" width="200" >}}

Average John Scalzi book: extremely entertaining, highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Breast and eggs

{{< book id="50736031" title="Breasts and Eggs" name="breasts-and-eggs.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

I had very high expectations for Breast and eggs since Ferrante recommends it and
everyone loves it.

I couldn't even finish it. It was excruciatingly boring ðŸ™ƒ

{{</ book >}}

## Children of time

{{< book id="25499718" title="Children of Time" name="children-of-time.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was a strange read. I loved the plot. It's a very interesting take on the
future of humanity. But the writing felt too distant from the action. Too cold.
It tired me out and I don't think I'll read the rest of the series.

{{</ book >}}

## Whearabouts

{{< book id="41584982" title="Dove mi trovo" name="dove-mi-trovo.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

Jhumpa Lahiri has been an incredible discovery. She wrote "Dove mi trovo" in
Italian and then translated it to English with the title "Whereabouts".

There's something very special about her writing. I can't wait to read more from
here.

"Dove mi trovo" is hard to describe. In the words of a perfect Goodreads review, it's
a book about everything and nothing. It's a thing of great beauty. I'm sure I'll
go back to it many times.

{{</ book >}}

## Velocity weapon

{{< book id="41085049" title="Velocity Weapon" name="velocity-weapon.jpg" width="200" >}}

I'm so happy I impulse-bought Velocity weapon the first time I came across it. A
very entertaining read. Space opera with great pace and lots of surprises. Maybe
the last 150 pages of the whole series were a bit confusing but all in all a
fantastic read!

{{</ book >}}

## Chaos vector

{{< book id="49088636" title="Chaos Vector" name="chaos-vector.jpg" width="200" >}}

See the previous review.

{{</ book >}}

## Catalyst gate

{{< book id="55836835" title="Catalyst Gate" name="catalyst-gate.jpg" width="200" >}}

See the previous review.

{{</ book >}}

## Beautiful world, where are you

{{< book id="59808034" title="Beautiful World, Where Are You" name="beautiful-world-where-are-you.jpg" width="200" >}}

A bit of a strange read. I really can't stand the way Rooney writes dialogs. But
someone I grew to like how real the characters are.

I suppose I have to read "normal people" soon because, despite the annoying
writing style, I enjoyed this book quite a bit.

{{</ book >}}

## I'm glad my mom died

{{< book id="59364173" title="I'm Glad My Mom Died" name="im-glad-my-mom-died.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was a very though read for obvious reasons. But I'm happy I went through
it. The author is very courageous and a very talented writer.

I hear she is writing a novel now and can't wait to read that too.

{{</ book >}}

## Girl, woman, other

{{< book id="60243617" title="Girl, Woman, Other" name="girl-woman-other.jpg" width="200" >}}

I had some troubles getting into Girl, woman, other because the writing
technique is very original: there are almost no periods in the book, sentences
just end and on to the next line with a new sentence. Once I got used to it, I
found it very poetic. It gave the book a rhythm that I can't quite explain with
words. Ah! The irony of not having words about something made out entirely of
words.

I loved how loosely connected the chapters are (each chapter is about a
different woman). It's not in your face but it also felt somewhat relevant. Some
of these stories will be in my head for a long time.

{{</ book >}}

## Queenie

{{< book id="36586697" title="Queenie" name="queenie.jpg" width="200" >}}

I had not expected to identify with Queenie as much as I did for obvious
reasons. But I've had a very similar experience as the one depicted here. When I
was 28 the world stopped for me for a year or so. I did tons of therapy and
slowly got better. Queenie hit way too close to home in that regard.

The writing is funny and engaging. Surely I'll read everything else
Carty-Williams wrote shorty. Highly recommended.

I can't wait to watch the TV adaptation (the author is involved!).

{{</ book >}}

## A brief history of seven killings

{{< book id="25694095" title="A Brief History of Seven Killings" name="a-brief-history-of-seven-killings.jpg" width="200" >}}

A difficult read. A brief history of seven killings is very long and some parts
felt a bit of a drag.

Having said that, I had never read a book like this. Every chapter is a
different narrator and they're all written in first person. The quality of the
writing is so high that it genuinely felt like chapters were written by totally
different people. That's what kept me reading it.

{{</ book >}}

## People person

{{< book id="125112285" title="People Person" name="people-person.jpg" width="200" >}}

I was very curious about People Person going in because I love Queenie. "People
Person" is a very different book though. For starters, It's written in third
person. It's also about five people instead of one. They have the same,
completely absent, father in common and they get connected in a pretty morbid
way.

The pace is fantastic. It's tragicomic in the best sense possible.

{{</ book >}}

## Dune

{{< book id="39776179" title="Dune" name="dune.jpg" width="200" >}}

Well, I get why it's so famous. The world building is incredible.

Dune is also long but doesn't feel like that. The writing feels light on the
page, and it has a good pace.

I loved that Herbert describes the thoughts of the characters as they talk to
each other. It's a very intriguing approach.

{{</ book >}}

## In altre parole

{{< book id="24777102" title="In altre parole" name="in-altre-parole.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

I can't wrap my head around how good Jhumpa Lahiri is. I absolutely love her
writing style. Her Italian is fantastic!

This book is her personal, delicate but intense journey with Italian. Since I
can read at native level both in Italian and in English, "In altre parole" was a
wonderful trip into the experience of being a writer in both languages.

I also identify with some of her experience very deeply as I mostly write in
English these days and it's both liberating and frustrating.

Highly recommended. I will re-read soon in English.

{{</ book >}}

## Racconti Romani

{{< book id="62839726" title="Racconti romani" name="racconti-romani.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

A good collection. It's hard for me to love short story collections, not really
sure why. One of the stories will stay for me for a long time and that's more
than enough.

{{</ book >}}

## L'eco della pioggia

{{< book id="50716314" title="L'eco della pioggia" name="leco-della-pioggia.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

Normally I love You Hua's voice. His writing is so gripping that I often welcome
his excursions in the past.

In "L'eco della poggia" though, it felt messy. I often lost contact with the
main narrative, it just didn't work for me.

It's an early book so maybe he hadn't found yet that incredible strength so
typical of his later books.

{{</ book >}}

## Lost in time

{{< book id="60522318" title="Lost in Time" name="lost-in-time.jpg" width="200" >}}

The plot of "Lost in time" sounded intriguing but I was also a little skeptical.
Time travel is quite tricky to make interesting and I think the author here did
a fantastic job balancing sci-fi and crime. I definitely want to read more from
him.

{{</ book >}}

## An American marriage

{{< book id="39699339" title="An American Marriage" name="an-american-marriage.jpg" width="200" >}}

A friend lent me An american marriage. I had never heard of it before so I was a
little cautious going in without researching the book myself.

It was a pleasant surprise. The writing is honest and powerful. The dialogs felt
very real me, so did the main characters. The topic is difficult so this was no
easy read though. I loved how the author approached the plot, I will definitely
read more from her.

{{</ book >}}

## The goldfinch

{{< book id="34695800" title="A Common" name="the-goldfinch.jpg" width="200" >}}

What can I possibly say about Donna Tartt that will actually convey how good she
is?

The thing is that The secret history is so good I didn't think she could match
it. In way, I think that's true but not for the reasons you'd expect. The secret
history is a perfect book: every page is 10/10.

The goldfinch is different. There are lots of 11/10 pages, especially in the
first 400 pages. But there are also some 9/10 pages: less power, less detail,
slower flow.

With that out of the way, another absolute masterpiece. Theo, the main
character, isn't a character. It's a person you get to know very well, someone
you end up caring for, someone you'll find yourself asking how they're doing in
the middle of your day.

**Top book.**

{{</ book >}}

## The internet con

{{< book id="120806182" title="The Internet Con" name="the-internet-con.jpg" width="200" >}}

I enjoyed The internet con very much. It was very interesting to me because I
know almost nothing about the topics covered.

The writing felt a little rushed in some parts but nothing major. Worthy of your
time if the topic is of interest.

{{</ book >}}

## Starter villain

{{< book id="61885029" title="Starter Villain" name="starter-villain.jpg" width="200" >}}

Average John Scalzi book: extremely entertaining, highly recommended.

Honestly, I don't get how he does this with every single book? What a pro!

{{</ book >}}

## Klara and the sun

{{< book id="54120408" title="Klara and the Sun" name="klara-and-the-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}

Klara and the sun never really pulled me in and I struggled to finish it. I'm
not entirely sure why but the writing felt distant.

{{</ book >}}

## Babel

{{< book id="57945316" title="Babel" name="babel.jpg" width="200" >}}

Kuang is a master of the craft.

Her writing is so good it pulled me into an alternate historical fiction where
magic is real. In theory, I shouldn't like a book about magic. In practice, I
loved every page.

The plot is fantastic and, while I understand some may not like this, I enjoyed
that magic is real but it's also not central.

{{</ book >}}

## The worlds I see

{{< book id="144405196" title="The Worlds I See" name="the-worlds-i-see.jpg" width="200" >}}

The pitch of The worlds I see is: chinese immigrant coming of age story mixed
with forefront of AI scientist life from struggle to success. Well, count me in!

But there's more than that to it. The writing has that strength and clarity you
come across very rarely. It's well-educated, rich language without any hint of
elitism. Now that I think about it, last I had this exact feeling was also a
"non-pro" writer. "When breathe becomes air", unrelated but magnificent read
(definitely a top book. Thank you Anjali for landing it to me. Miss talking to
you!).

{{</ book >}}
