---
title: "The Books I Read in 2023"
description: "Now a tradition"
date: 2024-01-02T23:21:38+01:00
draft: true
tags:
  - books
keywords: lucapette, books
images:
  - books/2023/cover.jpg
---

Almost exactly one year ago I decided to write a few words about all the books I
had read in the past 12 months. It was fun and it was well-received so I decided
to take notes about the books I read in 2023 as the year went by.

I'm very glad I did so because I read 85 books in 2023 and it would have taken
me a while to write every single review from scratch.

## Walkaway

{{< book id="40604388" title="Walkaway" name="books/2023/walkaway.jpg" width="200" >}}

After 50 pages or so I was confused. There was very little going on. I generally
hate that but here I was loving it. The conversations were too interesting. It
also turned out to be just a slow start. The story picked up some pace after 100
pages or so and developed into an intriguing plot. A book that leaves you with
lots to think about.

{{</ book >}}

## The space between words

{{< book id="61224687" title="The Space Between Worlds " name="books/2023/the-space-between-worlds.jpg" width="200" >}}

A slow start but the book kept getting better and better. Two things really
stand out for me:

- It's an original story despite a well-known multiverse setup.
- The writing is very good, clear, and simple. A few descriptions shocked me for
  their efficacy and brevity.

OK, I lied. One more thing: it made me want to write in the multiverse setup.
Pretty sure I have enough unfinished writing projects though üôÉ

{{</ book >}}

## Station eleven

{{< book id="23593321" title="Station Eleven"
name="books/2023/station-eleven.jpg" width="200" >}}

Not even 100 pages in I already was sure I'd read everything Emily St John
Mandel wrote.

This book is perfect. At first the writing is very good but feels a little
stiff, a little too formal. Then it just keeps getting better, everything starts
to flow. The pace is perfect throughout the whole book.

Mandel develops the plot perfectly. She masters words, time, and people. She
gives you enough to connect the dots but still leaves you surprised when you
connect them.

I will think about this book for a very long time.

Top book.

{{</ book >}}

## The glass hotel

{{< book id="52238882" title="The Glass Hotel"
name="books/2023/the-glass-hotel.jpg" width="200" >}}

I impulse-bought this book because of Station eleven (‚òùÔ∏è). I loved the first 200
pages but got a little bored with how the plot developed toward the end.  I felt
like Mandel spent too much time on an aspect of the story I had only considered
tangential. Basically, the rest of plot was much more interesting.

Lovely touch that characters overlap with station eleven. It's not forced. It's
not in your face. Mandel's writing is delicate and elegant.

{{</ book >}}

## The time traveler's wife

{{< book id="18619684" title="The Time Traveler's Wife" name="books/2023/the-time-travelers-wife.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was a strange read. I enjoyed the writing very much.  I also liked a lot I
got to read two perspectives over the same things.

So it had everything to be a perfect book. But I found myself not reaching for
it because I wasn't engaged with the story at all. Maybe I just need too much of
"what happen" next.

{{</ book >}}

## Black sun

{{< book id="50892360" title="Black Sun" name="books/2023/black-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}

Every now and then I try a fantasy book. I can't say I'm fond of the genre but
that says more about me than this book. In fact, it's well written book. I
enjoyed the unfolding of the story and the character development.

{{</ book >}}

## Too like the lightning

{{< book id="26114545" title="Too Like the Lightning" name="books/2023/too-like-the-lightning.jpg" width="200" >}}

Painful read. I actually couldn't get myself to finish it which almost never
happens to me. I couldn't connect with the plot (on paper, I should have loved
this). I think the writing style is the problem. I found it unnerving and
distracting.

{{</ book >}}

## First person singular

{{< book id="57292255" title="Prima persona singolare" name="books/2023/prima-persona-singolare.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in italian)

Murakami is one of my favourite novelists. I say novelist because I mean to
underline that's what I like about him. I love his novels but I can't stand his
short stories. I read this one because it was really short (I read it in two
sittings in the same day). As expected, it disappointed me.

There may be the wrong expectations at play here. I blame Dino Buzzati and his
magnificent  [Sessanta racconti](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/216019.Sessanta_racconti). Ever
since I read that, I expect short stories to be memorable. This collection has
none of that. To be fair, I have only read one collection that is as good: [To
Hold Up the Sky](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/57882885-to-hold-up-the-sky)

{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary justice

{{< book id="17333324" title="Ancillary Justice" name="books/2023/ancillary-justice.jpg" width="200" >}}

40 pages in I understood already why this book won all the prizes. It has
everything. Plot development is perfectly executed. The writing is masterful and
the characters are interesting. Highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary sword

{{< book id="20706284" title="Ancillary Sword" name="books/2023/ancillary-sword.jpg" width="200" >}}

So different from the first book and yet almost as good. The plot didn't feel as
interesting as Ancillary Justice but I think this says more about Justice than
Sword. Ann Leckie writing is way too good.
{{</ book >}}

## Ancillary mercy

{{< book id="23533039" title="Ancillary Mercy" name="books/2023/ancillary-mercy.jpg" width="200" >}}

A perfect ending to an amazing series. I look forward to more books in the same
universe. The alien character is exquisitely.. alien.

{{</ book >}}

## All systems red

I've been meaning to read this series for a while. So maybe I had the wrong
expectations about this book going in. It's fun but there's not enough context
around the story to keep me completely engaged. Easy read anyway because it's
pretty short.

## Artificial condition

I loved the pace of this one. The plot also felt much more interesting than the
previous one. It convinced me to read more in the series

## Rogue protocol

This one confused me. The plot wasn't clear to me. I did grew to like the
murderbot very much though

## exit strategy

I got tired of the series

## The Martian

I've been meaning to reading for a while because I liked the movie. So it kind
of just happened. As always, the book is better. Andy Weir invents good stories
and his writing is engaging and entertaining. Too bad this book is littered with
bro jokes. It didn't ruin it for me but got somewhere close to it

## Kindred

I will think about this book for a very long time. I thought I'd know how though
a read would be going in but it still caught me off guard. An absolute
masterpiece.

Top book.

## Termination shock

Mixed feelings. On one side, I got through 400 pages in a short time, on the
other the remaining 300 felt slow. I don't mind long books as long as there's
enough meat to the plot. This one is a little hit and miss. Having said that, a
must-read for cli-fi aficionado.

## The power

Strange book. I liked the first third, found the second third slow and "stitched
together‚Äù and loved most of the last third. The core idea is very intriguing but
the writing style didn't work for me.

## Blood child

Another masterpiece by Butler. The stories are so interesting, the writing is
perfect. I love the edition I got as it has a short afterword for each story.
Plus there are two fantastic writing essays.

Top book.

## Provenance

Intricate, beautifully developed plot. Ann Leckie is way too good at making
aliens speak. I couldn't be more excited there's a whole book about aliens
coming later this year.

## Donguri shimai

(Read in Italian)

There's something about the way Banana Yoshimoto writes I can't resist. The main
character is talking to you but it's not obvious. This short book (almost a
tale) doesn't develop much plot. In general, that's not my thing but Yoshimoto
always makes it interesting for me.

## Americanah

I loved everything about this book. Ifemelu. The slow but always moving plot.
The deliberate and non-linear story telling. What a writer.

Top book.

## China in ten words

(Read it in Italian)

I love the way You Hua writes anything, really. So it's not surprising I loved
this book as well. My favourite word, also unsurprising, is "writing". Among the
most beautiful "writing about writing" I have ever read.

## 10000 light-years from home

I tried really hard to go through it but really couldn't. I couldn't connect
with the writing style. It's like I read the words but they had no meaning for
me

## The vanishing half

It was a bit of a slow start but it got better and better. An amazing plot,
intricate and delicate.

## The long way to a small angry planet

Easy and entertaining read. I grew quite fond of Ohan. One of the aliens.

## A closed and common orbit

Again a very fun read. But I liked even more than the first book in the series.
Same universe, very little overlap. Loved how the author developed two
storylines.

## Record of a spaceborn few

This is the weakest of the series so far. I liked the structure of the book.
Lots of characters, not much overlap. But the stories didn't pull me in,  they
were just not interesting enough for me.

## Sea of tranquility

An incredibly well-crafted time travel story. Mandel's writing style is superb.
She's the writer I wish I was. I read the book in two sittings only over the
span of a single day.

Top book.

## Half of a yellow sun

"War is very ugly‚Äù.

What an incredible journey, what a writer. The characters are so incredible.
They're real people to me.

Top book.

## To be taught, if fortunate

Short but very rich of ideas. Entertaining writing as always.

## Africa is not a country

Very well written. It's an infuriating read, obviously. Highly recommended.

## The city & the city

Very original, intriguing story. But the writing didn't pull me in. It happens a
lot with "detective stories‚Äù that I don't feel engaged. I think it's a matter of
pace and can't tell if it's the writers fault. Probably not.

## To kill a mockingbird

It really didn't do it for me. Maybe it's the perspective from which the story
is told. I can't really tell.

## The memory librarian

I liked two stories out of five. There's nothing wrong with the rest but the
style doesn't do it for me. It's like a great picture that is out of focus. You
can tell it's great but you're also disappointed you can't see the details.

## Semiosis

A very intriguing take on "first contact" and alien life forms. I also enjoyed
the way the book is structured: every chapter a different narrator, every time a
time jump.

## Interference

The follow up book. I liked it even more than the first one. The flow of this
one is smoother. Maybe it's just that the time jumps are shorter, I can't tell.

## The terraformers

Three stories, two time jumps. Lots of amazing characters. Maybe they're not as
developed as the plot but all in all a very enjoyable book.

## Purple hibiscus

Chimamanda Ngozi Adichie is an incredible writer so it makes sense her debut is
magnificent. The writing is not as potent as her later work but you can tell
she's going to get there. The plot of this book develops so softly that I must
believe it's an intentional opposition to the trauma and violence you experience
reading it.

## Parable of the sower

The thing about post-apocalyptic worlds is that they always feel pretty far. The
detachment makes the book you're reading somewhat entertaining. This book
doesn;t work like that. Two reasons:

- Octavia E. Butler is in a league of her own. Her writing is so potent, crude,
  real. It's sharper than the shaper knife and then more delicate that falling
  snow.
- The world in this book feels close. It feels really close. It's fucking scary
  how much of a hell it is and how close it feels to where we are now.

Top book.

## Parable of the talents

If possible, this is even better than the first book. The most difficult read in
a long time. Same idea as the first book: it's really really scary how close
this hell feels to our day to day reality. And thinking this book was written in
the early nineties just adds volume to how incredible Butler is.

Top book.

## This is how you lose the time war

Every now and then I come across a book that I don't understand at all. I can't
connect to it in any way. This was one such book. I managed to read it in one
day because it's very short but I found it painless nonetheless

## Translation state

Ann Leckie doesn't know how to write bad books. She's a 5-star only author.
Translation state has three main characters, each chapter follows a different
character and uses a different POV. I loved every page. It's entertaining and
weird (because a great gook about aliens must be weird!)

## The thing around your neck

Chimamanda Ngoni Adichie is a master of the craft. As a fan, I was a little
worried about a a collection of short stories. I very rarely like those.  But
Adichie isn't your average writer. Each story has a unique voice. All of them
are intriguing. I loved all of it and will re-read in a few months.

## Yellowface

Great pace. A real page-turner. Kuang makes it all look easy to deal with. The
book flows at incredible speed and I just wanted to know where it was going.

## The shadow king

I could not connect with the writing style at all. I had trouble finishing it to
be honest.

## Tomorrow tomorrow and tomorrow

What an incredible journey. The first few pages felt a little strange. Too many
big words, I was afraid I'd hate the writing style. But it was the wrong
impression. The quality of the writing quickly improved to the highest standard.
I loved the plot. I loved the main characters. I loved the nostalgia for the
early days of gaming.

## How high we go in the dark

I enjoyed the first third of the book very much (despite the very triggering
content) but then it kept getting less interesting. The last third I was totally
disengaged with the story.

## The secret history

This book found its way to me. I was in a bookshop with a close friend , he
picked it up and said "I read this some 20 years ago but I still remember it‚Äù.
This intrigued me because he's an avid reader. Two days after that, I was
listening to Emily St. John Mandel talking about her writing process and she
mentioned Donna Tartt. I love these little signs.

I appreciate them even more when the book turns out to be an absolute
masterpiece like the secret history is. Donna Tartt has this magical ability to
keep you busy reading while describing incredibly detailed stories. The story of
this book is very very intense. I **loved** every page. That's quite something
given the page count.

Top book.

## Redshirts

The "usual" very entertaining writing style of Scalzi. The plot didn't do it for
me this time though.

## A bigger picture

Interesting and depressing (not the author's fault of course). I did not find
the writing very engaging but I enjoyed it nonetheless

## Pachinko

This was quite an incredible journey spanning almost a 100 years. I loved this
story. It surprised me, it pained me, it had me interested every single page.

Top book.

## Lock in

The usual Scalzi

## Head on

The usual Scalzi

## Breast and eggs

I had very high expectations for this book. Ferrante recommends it. Everyone
loves it. But I couldn't even finish it. It was excruciatingly boring.

## Children of time

This was a strange read. I loved the plot. It's a very interesting take on the
future of humanity. But the writing felt too distant from the action. Too cold.
It tired me out and I don't think I'll read the rest of the series.

## Whearabouts

(Read in Italian)

Jhumpa Lahiri has been an incredible discovery. She wrote this book in Italian
and then translated it to English (). There's something very special
about her writing style. I can't wait to read more from here.

This book is hard to describe. In the words of a perfect Goodreads review, it's
a book about everything and nothing. It's a thing of great beauty. I'm sure I'll
go back to it many times.

## Velocity weapon

I'm so happy I insta-bought this the first time I came across it. A very
entertaining read. Space opera with great pace and lots of surprises. Maybe the
last 150 pages of the whole series were a bit confusing but all in all a
fantastic read!

## Chaos vector

See the previous review

## Catalyst gate

See the previous review

## Beautiful world, where are you

A bit of a strange read. I really can't stand the writing style of dialogs (look
up how this is called). But someone I grew to like how "normal" these people
are. I suppose I have to read "normal people‚Äù too because, despite the writing
style, I enjoyed this book quite a bit.

## I'm glad my mom died

This was a very though read. But I'm glad I went through it. The author is very
courageous.

## Girl, woman, other

I had some troubles getting into this book because the writing style is very
original. There are almost no periods in the book, sentences just end and on to
the next line. Once I got used to it, I found it very poetic. It gave the book a
whole rhythm that I can't really explain with words (ah the irony of not having
words about something made out entirely of words).

I loved how loosely connected the women in the book are. It's not in your face
but it's also somewhat relevant. Some of these women will be in my head for a
long time. Their stories are profound.

## Queenie

I had not expected to identify with the main character of this book as much as I
did for obvious reasons. But in fact, I've had a very similar experience. When I
was 28 the world stopped for me for a year. I did tons of therapy and slowly got
better. This book hit way too close to home in that regard.

The writing is funny and engaging. Surely I'll read everything else the author
wrote shorty. Highly recommended.

## A brief history of seven killings

A difficult read. The book is very long and some parts felt a bit of a drag.
Having said that, I had never read a book like this. Every chapter is a
different narrator and they're all written in first person. The quality of the
writing is so high that it genuinely felt like chapters were written by totally
different people. That's what kept me reading it.

## People person

I was very curious about this book going in because I loved Queenie. But I could
not not love it. It's a first person book I could identify very strongly so
"People Person‚Äù was a perfect test so to speak. It's a very different book. It's
written in third person. It's about five people that have the same completely
absent father in common. The pace of the book is fantastic. It's tragicomic in
the best sense possible.

## Dune

Well, I get why it's so famous. The world building is really incredible. The
book is also very long but doesn't feel like that. The writing style feels light
on the page, and there's a good pace. I love the fact that the author gives us
the thoughts of the characters as they talk to each other. It's a very
intriguing approach.

## In altre parole

(Read in Italian)

I can't wrap my head around how good Jhumpa  Lahiri is. I absolutely love her
writing style. Her Italian is fantastic.

This book is her personal, delicate but intense journey with Italian. Since I
can read at "native‚Äù level both in Italian and in English  this book was a
wonderful trip into the experience of an incredible writer. I also identify some
of her experience very deeply as I mostly write in English these days and it's
both liberating and frustrating.

Highly recommended. I will re-read soon in English.

## Racconti Romani

(Read in Italian)

A good collection. It's hard for me to love short story collections, not really
sure why. One of the stories will stay for me for a long time and that's more
than enough.

## L'eco della pioggia

(Read in Italian)

Normally I love You Hua's voice. His writing is so gripping that I often welcome
his excursions in the past. In this book though, it felt messy. I often lost
contact with the main narrative, it just didn't work for me. It's an early book
so maybe he hadn't found that incredible strength so typical of his books yet.

## Lost in time

The plot of this book sounded intriguing but I was also a little skeptical. Time
travel is quite tricky to make interesting and I think the author here did a
fantastic job balancing sci-fi and crime. Definitely want to read more from him.

## An American marriage

A friend landed me this book and I had never heard of it before so I was a
little cautious going in without researching the book myself. This was a
pleasant surprise. The writing is honest and powerful. The dialogs felt very
real me, so did the main characters. The topic is difficult so this was no easy
read though. Loved how the author approached the plot, I will definitely read
more from there.

## The goldfinch

What can I say about Donna Tartt that will actually convey how good she is? The
thing is that "the secret history‚Äù is so good I didn't think she could match it.
In way, I think that's true but not for the reasons you'd expect. The way I
think about "the secret history‚Äù is that it's a perfect book. Every page is
10/10. For real.

The goldfinch is different. There's lots of 11/10 pages. Especially in the first
400 pages. But there are also some 9/10 pages: less power, less detail, slower
flow.

With that out of the way, another absolute masterpiece. Theo, the main
character, isn't a character. It's a person you know, someone you end up caring
for. His life is difficult and get worse over time in painful ways.

Top book.

## The internet con

Enjoyed it very much. The content was very interesting to me because I know
almost nothing about the topics covered. The writing felt a little rushed in
some parts but nothing major.

## Starter villain

The usual Scalzi

## Klara and the sun

The book never really pulled me in and I struggled to finish it. I'm not
entirely sure why but the writing felt distant.

## Babel

Rebecca F. Kuang is a master of the craft. Her writing is so good it pulled me
into an alternate historical fiction where magic is real. In theory, I shouldn't
like such a book. In practice, I loved every page.

The plot is fantastic and, while I understand some may not like this, I enjoyed
that magic is real but it's also not central.

## The worlds I see

This pulled me in immediately. The pitch of the book was great for someone like
me. Chinese immigrant coming of age story mixed with forefront of AI scientist.
Count me in.

But there's more than that to this book. The writing has that strength and
clarity you come across very rarely. It's well-educated, rich language without
any hint of elitism. Now that I think about it, last I had this exact feeling
was also a "non-pro‚Äù writer. "When breathe becomes air‚Äù, unrelated but
magnificent read (triggering topic though).

{{< book id="32758901" title="All Systems Red" name="books/2023/all-systems-red.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="36223860" title="Artificial Condition" name="books/2023/artificial-condition.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="35519101" title="Rogue Protocol" name="books/2023/rogue-protocol.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="35519109" title="Exit Strategy" name="books/2023/exit-strategy.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="18007564" title="The Martian" name="books/2023/the-martian.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="38190066" title="Kindred" name="books/2023/kindred.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="59663279" title="Termination Shock" name="books/2023/termination-shock.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="29751398" title="The Power" name="books/2023/the-power.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="60930" title="Bloodchild and Other Stories" name="books/2023/bloodchild-and-other-stories.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="25353286" title="Provenance " name="books/2023/provenance.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="40668314" title="Le sorelle Donguri" name="books/2023/le-sorelle-donguri.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="58522291" title="Americanah" name="books/2023/americanah.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="12884314" title="China in Ten Words" name="books/2023/china-in-ten-words.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="52692608" title="Ten Thousand Light" name="books/2023/ten-thousand-light.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="55298625" title="The Vanishing Half" name="books/2023/the-vanishing-half.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="25786523" title="The Long Way to a Small, Angry Planet " name="books/2023/the-long-way-to-a-small-angry-planet.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="29475447" title="A Closed and Common Orbit " name="books/2023/a-closed-and-common-orbit.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="123639782" title="Sea of Tranquility" name="books/2023/sea-of-tranquility.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="32802595" title="Record of a Spaceborn Few " name="books/2023/record-of-a-spaceborn-few.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="35451559" title="Half of a Yellow Sun" name="books/2023/half-of-a-yellow-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="48657666" title="To Be Taught, If Fortunate" name="books/2023/to-be-taught-if-fortunate.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="61403413" title="Africa Is Not a Country" name="books/2023/africa-is-not-a-country.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="39710105" title="The City & The City" name="books/2023/the-city--the-city.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="8045416" title="To Kill a Mockingbird " name="books/2023/to-kill-a-mockingbird.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="58677491" title="The Memory Librarian" name="books/2023/the-memory-librarian.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="35018907" title="Semiosis " name="books/2023/semiosis.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="43263202" title="Interference " name="books/2023/interference.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="60784471" title="The Terraformers" name="books/2023/the-terraformers.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="37785879" title="Purple Hibiscus" name="books/2023/purple-hibiscus.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="41161349" title="Parable of the Sower " name="books/2023/parable-of-the-sower.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="46159606" title="Parable of the Talents " name="books/2023/parable-of-the-talents.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="41093489" title="This Is How You Lose the Time War" name="books/2023/this-is-how-you-lose-the-time-war.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="62873911" title="Translation State" name="books/2023/translation-state.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="34397251" title="The Thing Around Your Neck" name="books/2023/the-thing-around-your-neck.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="59357120" title="Yellowface" name="books/2023/yellowface.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="43726511" title="The Shadow King" name="books/2023/the-shadow-king.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="59350163" title="Tomorrow, and Tomorrow, and Tomorrow" name="books/2023/tomorrow-and-tomorrow-and-tomorrow.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="69706993" title="How High We Go in the Dark" name="books/2023/how-high-we-go-in-the-dark.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="70897" title="The Secret History" name="books/2023/the-secret-history.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="13055592" title="Redshirts" name="books/2023/redshirts.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="56817598" title="A Bigger Picture" name="books/2023/a-bigger-picture.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="34051011" title="Pachinko" name="books/2023/pachinko.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="21418013" title="Lock In" name="books/2023/lock-in.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="35018901" title="Head On" name="books/2023/head-on.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="50736031" title="Breasts and Eggs" name="books/2023/breasts-and-eggs.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="25499718" title="Children of Time" name="books/2023/children-of-time.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="41584982" title="Dove mi trovo" name="books/2023/dove-mi-trovo.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="41085049" title="Velocity Weapon" name="books/2023/velocity-weapon.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="49088636" title="Chaos Vector" name="books/2023/chaos-vector.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="55836835" title="Catalyst Gate" name="books/2023/catalyst-gate.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="59808034" title="Beautiful World, Where Are You" name="books/2023/beautiful-world-where-are-you.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="59364173" title="I'm Glad My Mom Died" name="books/2023/im-glad-my-mom-died.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="60243617" title="Girl, Woman, Other" name="books/2023/girl-woman-other.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="36586697" title="Queenie" name="books/2023/queenie.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="25694095" title="A Brief History of Seven Killings" name="books/2023/a-brief-history-of-seven-killings.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="125112285" title="People Person" name="books/2023/people-person.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="39776179" title="Dune" name="books/2023/dune.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="24777102" title="In altre parole" name="books/2023/in-altre-parole.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="62839726" title="Racconti romani" name="books/2023/racconti-romani.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="50716314" title="L'eco della pioggia" name="books/2023/leco-della-pioggia.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="60522318" title="Lost in Time" name="books/2023/lost-in-time.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="39699339" title="An American Marriage" name="books/2023/an-american-marriage.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="34695800" title="A Common" name="books/2023/a-common.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="17333223" title="The Goldfinch" name="books/2023/the-goldfinch.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="120806182" title="The Internet Con" name="books/2023/the-internet-con.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="171691901" title="Tidy First?" name="books/2023/tidy-first.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="61885029" title="Starter Villain" name="books/2023/starter-villain.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="54120408" title="Klara and the Sun" name="books/2023/klara-and-the-sun.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="57945316" title="Babel" name="books/2023/babel.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
{{< book id="144405196" title="The Worlds I See" name="books/2023/the-worlds-i-see.jpg" width="200" >}}
{{</ book >}}
