---
title: "The Books I Read in 2022"
description: "A good excuse to reflect on the books I read this year"
date: 2022-12-27T08:41:06+01:00
draft: true
tags:
  - books
keywords: lucapette, books
---

I love reading _and_ I love writing so this kind of end of the year article
should be natural for me. And yet it is the first time I write something like
this. I'm not even sure why. Hopefully, I'll be able to do this every year from
now on.

Since it's the first time I do this, the article is broken down in two parts.
First I go over each book and share a few words. It's a _long_ list because this
was a good year for my reading habits. The [second
part](#how-i-extracted-the-data) is a quick description of how I extracted the
data from goodreads and played around with it to create this article.

## The books

I thought of grouping the books for faster access. But any grouping I could
think of had flaws so I'm presenting the books in the order I read them. Another
thing I thought of doing and then decided against is to share a rating for each
book. I tend to rate my books quite high: my average rating on goodreads is 4.1
(out of 547 read books). This is a consequence of spending a lot of time
researching what to read next. I enjoy the process very much; bookshops are my
happy place.

{{< book id="45152372" title="How to Stop Time" name="books/2022/how-to-stop-time.jpg" width="200" >}}

I had high expectations for this book. I loved [the midnight
library](https://www.goodreads.com/book/show/52578297-the-midnight-library) and the plot intrigued me very much. I has strong [Highlander](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Highlander_(film)>) vibes and I loved this movie as a kid.

And yet, I couldn't connect with the book. The story is fascinating, the writing
is very good but there's genuinely nothing going on. Time moves forward, the
story seems stuck. I hoped for a great ending but that also didn't happen.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="56646328" title="Send Help!" name="books/2022/send-help.jpg" width="200" >}}

My wife reads lots of comic strips so I read some for proximity. This wasn't
particularly fun to me but they're such a short time investment it's no big
deal.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="248787" title="The World Without Us" name="books/2022/the-world-without-us.jpg" width="200" >}}

I read this book as research for a writing project (now stalled by another one).
The writing was really boring to me and I struggled to finish it. The content is
very interesting though.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="2102600" title="Zoe's Tale" name="books/2022/zoes-tale.jpg" width="200" >}}

This is the fourth book (out of six) in the [Old man's
war](https://www.goodreads.com/series/40789-old-man-s-war) saga. One of my
absolute favourite sci-fi sagas ever. I'm sure I will reread all of it soon
enough.

Moreover, [John Scalzi](https://whatever.scalzi.com/) is one of my favourite
writers in general. His writing style is very engaging and entertaining.

And still I waited a while before reading the second part of this saga. Somehow
I didn't find the premise of "Zoe's Tale" intriguing. It tells a story you
already know through the eyes of a teen.

I was wrong! I loved the book. Zoe's voice is believable (I'm a man though... so
take that with a grain of salt) and the new angle on the story is refreshing. It
does indeed answer some questions I didn't know I wanted answers for. Highly
recommended.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="15698479" title="The Human Division" name="books/2022/the-human-division.jpg" width="200" >}}

Average John Scalzi book: highly entertaining, extremely recommended.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="23168809" title="The End of All Things" name="books/2022/the-end-of-all-things.jpg" width="200" >}}

Average John Scalzi book: highly entertaining, extremely recommended.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="50998056" title="The Ministry for the Future" name="books/2022/the-ministry-for-the-future.jpg" width="200" >}}

This is one of the strangest book I have ever read. I hated the writing style
and really struggled to finish it. It felt like I was reading the first draft of
a masterpiece. Infuriating.

On the other hand, I loved some ideas and a few scenes from the book stayed with
me for months.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="58796563" title="Speed & Scale" name="books/2022/speed--scale.jpg" width="200" >}}

The most important book I read in 2022, hands down. As soon as I finished, I
recommended it to anyone I know. It's well written and makes a compelling
argument to "solve" climate change with the same tools that got us here.

What I think about the plan would need its own article so I spare you that. But
do read it. Also, you want a physical copy of this book. It's really beautiful.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="43633741" title="Kafka in Action" name="books/2022/kafka-in-action.jpg" width="200" >}}

I'm very interested in [Kafka](https://kafka.apache.org) so it's only natural I
read books coming my way. I bought this book long before it was published. In
fact, when I got it I had forgot about it completely :)

It's a good book and will teach you the basics of Kafka. I remember finding the
examples in the book a little annoying but nothing major.

If I had to recommend one book to get started with Kafka, it wouldn't be this
one though. If that's the book you're looking for, you want to read "Kafka: the
definitive guide".

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="55662833" title="Atomic Kotlin" name="books/2022/atomic-kotlin.jpg" width="200" >}}

When I'm learning a new language, the first thing I do is reading a book about
it. So when I started researching Kotlin I was very pleased to find this book. I
loved "Thinking in Java" back at Uni.

The book did not disappoint. Very good writing, thoughtful examples.
Recommended.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="33369254" title="The Manager's Path" name="books/2022/the-managers-path.jpg" width="200" >}}

This is a little painful to write for me. Because I want to say I loved this
book but I didn't.

[Camille Fourier](https://www.camilletalk.com/) is someone I look up to. I read
many of her blog posts while furiously nodding.

So I think the problem is that I had very high expectations. I'm also convinced
I had the wrong expectations, meaning I though I'd find more useful information
to me personally.

Having said all of this, I think you should read it if you care about
engineering management. It's well written and it's a solid book.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="45303387" title="An Elegant Puzzle" name="books/2022/an-elegant-puzzle.jpg" width="200" >}}

I struggle to write anything constructive about this book. Avoid.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="50363684" title="Become an Effective Software Engineering Manager" name="books/2022/become-an-effective-software-engineering-manager.jpg" width="200" >}}

I confess I went into this book very sceptical about it. Pragmatic programmers
books have this tech bro vibe I'm not really fond of. The title of this book is
in line with that vibe.

But I was pleasantly surprised by the quality of the writing and the actionable
advice. This is a great first engineering management book. It reads like a guide
so it's perfect for people that have no experience with the job.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="38821039" title="The Making of a Manager" name="books/2022/the-making-of-a-manager.jpg" width="200" >}}

[Julie Zhuo](https://juliezhuo.com/) is an incredible writer. If you're not
subscribed to her newsletter, you're missing out on great content. So I'm not surprised I loved her book.

It's a personal take on engineering management and reads more like a novel than
a technical book (I mean this as a strong compliment).

Julie's writing is elegant and the stories she tells are engaging. Highly
recommended.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="51163447" title="Building Event-driven microservices"
name="books/2022/building-event.jpg" width="200" >}}

If I hadn't known upfront what this book was about, I'm sure I'd never read it.
What I'm trying to say is that the title is a little off.

It's more abut streaming platforms than "microservices". It's a good overview.
To me, it's a "read if you care about the subject" book. I'm sure some people
will miss on it because of the title though.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="33080122" title="The Calculating Stars" name="books/2022/the-calculating-stars.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="33081262" title="The Fated Sky" name="books/2022/the-fated-sky.jpg" width="200" >}}

See previous review.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="52381417" title="The Relentless Moon" name="books/2022/the-relentless-moon.jpg" width="200" >}}

See previous review.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="7767021" title="Who Fears Death" name="books/2022/who-fears-death.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="50734847" title="Of Ants and Dinosaurs" name="books/2022/of-ants-and-dinosaurs.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="50214741" title="The Girl with the Louding Voice" name="books/2022/the-girl-with-the-louding-voice.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="45252" title="Pandora's Star " name="books/2022/pandoras-star.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="39996759" title="A Philosophy of Software Design" name="books/2022/a-philosophy-of-software-design.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="45244" title="Judas Unchained" name="books/2022/judas-unchained.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="21611" title="The Forever War" name="books/2022/the-forever-war.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="21620" title="Forever Free" name="books/2022/forever-free.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="21618" title="Forever Peace " name="books/2022/forever-peace.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="18652140" title="Distributed Systems For Fun and Profit" name="books/2022/distributed-systems-for-fun-and-profit.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="13573419" title="Great North Road" name="books/2022/great-north-road.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="60280135" title="Upgrade" name="books/2022/upgrade.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="32953140" title="Hourly Billing is Nuts" name="books/2022/hourly-billing-is-nuts.jpg" width="200" >}}

Worth it if you're a freelancer.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="43386931" title="Learn Your Lines" name="books/2022/learn-your-lines.jpg" width="200" >}}

Worth it if you're a freelancer.

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="49113465" title="The City in the Middle of the Night" name="books/2022/the-city-in-the-middle-of-the-night.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="57693406" title="The Kaiju Preservation Society" name="books/2022/the-kaiju-preservation-society.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="48829708" title="To Sleep in a Sea of Stars" name="books/2022/to-sleep-in-a-sea-of-stars.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="34507927" title="How to Take Smart Notes" name="books/2022/how-to-take-smart-notes.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="50542114" title="Terraform in Action" name="books/2022/terraform-in-action.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="48930266" title="Seven and a Half Lessons About the Brain" name="books/2022/seven-and-a-half-lessons-about-the-brain.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="29780253" title="Born a Crime" name="books/2022/born-a-crime.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="53291342" title="Distributed Services with Go" name="books/2022/distributed-services-with-go.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="24611819" title="The Peripheral" name="books/2022/the-peripheral.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="37794149" title="A Memory Called Empire" name="books/2022/a-memory-called-empire.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="58661468" title="Crafting Interpreters" name="books/2022/crafting-interpreters.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="45154547" title="A Desolation Called Peace" name="books/2022/a-desolation-called-peace.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="6436659" title="Transition" name="books/2022/transition.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="10569" title="On Writing" name="books/2022/on-writing.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="52678845" title="Effective Kotlin" name="books/2022/effective-kotlin.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="59796908" title="Effective Software Testing" name="books/2022/effective-software-testing.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="58502800" title="Engineering Management for the Rest of Us" name="books/2022/engineering-management-for-the-rest-of-us.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

{{< book id="61943603" title="The Spare Man" name="books/2022/the-spare-man.jpg" width="200" >}}

{{</ book >}}

## How I extracted the data
