---
title: "The Books I Read in 2024"
description: "A brief review of the books I read in 2024."
date: 2025-02-01T23:21:38+01:00
tags:
  - books
keywords: lucapette, books
images:
  - cover.jpg
---

A tradition is a tradition but there are a few reasons why I find myself sharing
this a month or so later than I would normally do. Most of these reasons are
personal so I'm not gonna dwell on those. But one reason in particular is why I
got to February 2025 before sitting down to write even a single word about the
books I read in 2024.

The delay is a reflection of how long this internal debate took: Should I
explain why I almost read no fiction (which is _normally_ my primary reading) or
maybe should I just share the books?

The truth is I'm deciding _right now_ as I type these words on my laptop.

2024 was a horrible year for the world. Among the darkest chapters of our short,
dumb, violent  history on this planet. Watching a live-streamed genocide has
changed many people for ever but I have no intention to centre anyone but
Palestinians. As horrible as it was watching it, I can't even begin to imagine
what living it and surviving it means or feels. I can't imagine the pain
Palestinians have gone through in 2024 or any other year before that since the
Zionist project came to be.

So to try processing what I was witnessing, I did what I always do when I don't
understand something: I read. While it felt like a useless reaction to what I
was witnessing (what does this do, really?), I'm still glad I chose to radically
change the direction of my reading. I want to change things and I had to start
from somewhere. I don't know where this leads but I know I'll figure it out. In
the meanwhile, stay strong everyone. Free Palestine! 🇵🇸🇵🇸🇵🇸

Before I share the books I read, a quick note on what drove my selection. The
simplest way to explain it is that I'm trying to answer the question "how did we
get here?". It's not that simple in the end because "here" is many things:

- Is capitalism inherent to human nature?
- How did the US empire came to be?
- What's the relationship between climate change and colonialism?
- How do we get ourselves out of the fascist loop we're in?

Those are all proxy questions that helped me make sense of a live-streamed
genocide. Do I have all the answers? Of course I don't. But I learned a lot and
will try to share as I learn (which means also the main writing I'll do moving
forward will radically change direction). It's not much but it's better than
nothing? Hard to tell.

As always, the books are presented in the order I read them. Generally this
doesn't matter but I think this time around you can feel the directional change
in the first 10 books or so. You can also see I sometimes took "pauses" from my
non-fictional reading (which, by the way, I feel like it's going to be the new
default for a long time) and put a "pleasure reading" here and there. Now onto
to the book reviews.

## Places in the Darkness

{{< book id="31933061" title="Places in the Darkness" name="places-in-the-darkness.jpg" width="200" >}}

First book from this author. It had a good pace and the story was intriguing.
"Classic" crime sci-fi which is a genre I enjoy a lot so I may be overestimating
the quality of the book a bit :)

{{</ book >}}

## Climate Change

{{< book id="22104226" title="Climate Change" name="climate-change.jpg" width="200" >}}

A very well written introduction to everything climate change. I'd consider it
required reading for everyone since everyone should be interested in climate
change.

{{</ book >}}

## The Namesake

{{< book id="50633763" title="The Namesake" name="the-namesake.jpg" width="200" >}}

Lahiri keeps on giving. I love her writing style. She wrote this book in English
and it's so interesting to me that she's (obviously?) a different writer than she is in
Italian. There’s a sense of longing throughout the whole book. Reading the
namesake has made me very pensive. It's story of identity, immigration, love,
betrayal, family. In a way, it's "just" life.

**Top book**.

{{</ book >}}

## The Searcher

{{< book id="56587385" title="The Searcher" name="the-searcher.jpg" width="200" >}}

My first crime book in a long time. It's a little slow but has lots of very
beautiful pages. I think I'll read more from Tana French at some point.

{{</ book >}}

## Scattered All Over the Earth

{{< book id="163481412" title="Scattered All Over the Earth" name="scattered-all-over-the-earth.jpg" width="200" >}}

A strange read. I mean it in a good way. It's well written with a number of
characters. Each chapter a different character speaks. It's all in first person.
Intriguing cli-fi story.

{{</ book >}}

## Freedom Is A Constant Struggle

{{< book id="58032440" title="Freedom Is A Constant Struggle" name="freedom-is-a-constant-struggle.jpg" width="200" >}}

A must read collection of essays, interviews, and talks by Angela Y. Davis. It
thought me something new about politics: we have to be willing to complicate
things that look simple on the surface to get to their unfair, racist, core
meaning.

It also thought me it's really important to _never_ idolise people. What I mean
is that I was _very_ disappointed to read about her endorsement of Kamala
Harris.


{{</ book >}}

## Interpreter of Maladies

{{< book id="50240224" title="Interpreter of Maladies" name="interpreter-of-maladies.jpg" width="200" >}}

What can I say? Lahiri is one of my favourite writers. She makes me like short
shorties. Her ability to offer such a wide window in the life of a few people in
such a small amount of pages is remarkable.

{{</ book >}}

## Silver Sparrow

{{< book id="55879881" title="Silver Sparrow" name="silver-sparrow.jpg" width="200" >}}

The first part was a little slow. It improved significantly in the second part
and then felt a little rushed in its conclusion. All in all, lots of thoughts
and a pretty profound story about family, love, trust, identity.

{{</ book >}}

## The Middle East Crisis Factory

{{< book id="54429617" title="The Middle East Crisis Factory" name="the-middle-east-crisis-factory.jpg" width="200" >}}

An incredibly informative and well written book which I advise to read to anyone
interested in geopolitics (yes, everyone should be. But that's maybe a good
writing topic?)

{{</ book >}}

## The Mothers

{{< book id="28815371" title="The Mothers" name="the-mothers.jpg" width="200" >}}


I loved the vanishing half so I was very much looking forward to the mothers. I
probably read it in the wrong state of mind because I can tell the quality is
the same but I could not connect to this one as much.

{{</ book >}}

## Assata

{{< book id="100322" title="Assata" name="assata.jpg" width="200" >}}

A necessary and timely reading for my own path. Assata Shakur speaks her truth
with powerful, short, and crude sentences. It's as painful and as energising to
read.

**Top Book**.

{{</ book >}}

## Talking to My Daughter

{{< book id="44080495" title="Talking to My Daughter" name="talking-to-my-daughter.jpg" width="200" >}}

Varoufakis is an amazing writer. It's hard to write about technical things in
simple terms. The book also confirmed most of my gut feelings about the economy
(yes, it's more or less a religion. No, it's not a compliment).

{{</ book >}}

## The Wretched of the Earth

{{< book id="822730" title="The Wretched of the Earth" name="the-wretched-of-the-earth.jpg" width="200" >}}

An intense, necessary read. The most shocking quality of this book is the
absolute clarity of the writing. Fierce and crude words that are often
unforgettable. Fanon's analysis of colonialism is wide and deep in scope and,
unfortunately, it reads like it was written in 2023.

{{</ book >}}

## The Worldly Philosophers

{{< book id="82120" title="The Worldly Philosophers" name="the-worldly-philosophers.jpg" width="200" >}}

It bored me to death but I learned things so I can’t complain too much about it.

{{</ book >}}

## Orientalism

{{< book id="53237269" title="Orientalism" name="orientalism.jpg" width="200" >}}

A difficult, necessary read. It thought me a lot about the "truths" the west
invented for itself in order to serve its imperialist and colonialist goals.

{{</ book >}}

## Il popolo delle scimmie

{{< book id="61041632" title="Il popolo delle scimmie" name="il-popolo-delle-scimmie.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian. A collection of writings about the rise of fascism in Italy by Antonio Gramsci)

This was a difficult but, once again, necessary read. Having lived in Italy for
29 years makes this book more difficult I think because it really makes time
feel like a flat circle. Italians didn't change. Liberals didn't change.

Gramsci's writing is slow but very lucid despite the insanity around him.

{{</ book >}}

## I Have Some Questions For You

{{< book id="122184508" title="I Have Some Questions For You" name="i-have-some-questions-for-you.jpg" width="200" >}}

I loved the writing in this book. The first few pages put me off with some jokes
that fell flat and felt dad-joke-ish (that's a word right?). But then it grew on
me quickly. The way Makkai tells the story through her main character is very
interesting. Past and present mix together very nicely. The pace felt just
right, the plot develops well.

{{</ book >}}

## Il fascismo eterno

{{< book id="37903542" title="Il fascismo eterno" name="il-fascismo-eterno.jpg" width="200" >}}

(Read in Italian)

I hadn't read anything this political from Eco before so I wasn't sure what to
expect. I liked his thesis. It feels to me that he is "obviously right" about
the fact that Fascism is always around. It's always a danger.

The book is very short too so I expect to re-read it often.

{{</ book >}}

## Let This Radicalize You

{{< book id="71880568" title="Let This Radicalize You" name="let-this-radicalize-you.jpg" width="200" >}}

While the book is _very_ American centric, the essays are amazing. Lots of food
for thoughts for someone like me (meaning, in this context, "not an activist nor
an organizer")

{{</ book >}}

## The Myth of Normal

{{< book id="58537332" title="The Myth of Normal" name="the-myth-of-normal.jpg" width="200" >}}

This was a difficult read. But not because it's badly written or not engaging.
On the contrary, the writing is fantastic. It's kind of a page turner (for a
good 400 pages, the last part of the book felt a little slow).

It was difficult because it was easy to see myself into some traumas, some addictions. But the book also gave me a new perspective. New hope.

**Top book**.

{{</ book >}}

## The Nutmeg's Curse

{{< book id="59780089" title="The Nutmeg's Curse" name="the-nutmegs-curse.jpg" width="200" >}}

I have no idea how I came across this book but I'm so so happy I did. The
author's reflections and thoughts on climate change will stay for me for ever.
The way he connects the climate crisis with colonialism makes so much sense to
me.

If you only want to read one book from this list, read this.

**Top book**.

{{</ book >}}

## Hotel Arcadia

{{< book id="25016210" title="Hotel Arcadia" name="hotel-arcadia.jpg" width="200" >}}

I believe I read this at a bad moment. I just can’t take any violence involving
guns right now so I read this book in some sort of detached manner. Having said
that, I loved how the plot developed and the intense, beautifully written
flashbacks in the life of the two protagonists.

Very noticeable aspect of the book: The way Dr. Singh writes flashback is
_fantastic_.

{{</ book >}}

## Less Is More

{{< book id="53328332" title="Less Is More" name="less-is-more.jpg" width="200" >}}

I loved the ideas presented in this book. The author is an excellent writer
which of course helps. Throughout the whole book though, I couldn't shake the
feeling that, while I think de-growth seems a pretty "obvious" improvement over
capitalism, I see no concrete way to implement it in a world that's as lost as
ours. Especially at the speed we'd need these improvements.

{{</ book >}}

## A View from the Stars

{{< book id="158043792" title="A View from the Stars" name="a-view-from-the-stars.jpg" width="200" >}}

I love Cixin Liu imagination. The scope of his questions is immense. His ability
to mix and match the very small and the very big of our universe is just
incredible. This is a short collection of essays and stories. I thought I'd like
the stories more but in fact I liked the essays much better.


{{</ book >}}

## The Great Derangement

{{< book id="29362082" title="The Great Derangement" name="the-great-derangement.jpg" width="200" >}}

What an incredible writer! Some of the insight in the book (like the role of
religions) will stay with me for a long time. Highly recommended reading. Almost
as good as "the nutmeg's curse" (which is incredible)

**Top book**.

{{</ book >}}

## Brotherless Night

{{< book id="60324341" title="Brotherless Night" name="brotherless-night.jpg" width="200" >}}

A very intense journey into the Sri Lankan civil war. The book is magnificently
written.

**Top book**.

{{</ book >}}

## Dust Child

{{< book id="60831918" title="Dust Child" name="dust-child.jpg" width="200" >}}

A beautiful, difficult story told through four different people and three
different timelines. While this sounds complicated, the book is in fact very
readable. It lost a little strength toward the end and left me unconvinced of
its resolution. All things considered, a great read.

{{</ book >}}

## Shantaram

{{< book id="816552" title="Shantaram" name="shantaram.jpg" width="200" >}}

I went into this book a little skeptical. The length, the topic. I was unsure
but it still attracted me. It’s a pretty remarkable story, very intense. There’s
life in every page. Highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Between the World and Me

{{< book id="25489625" title="Between the World and Me" name="between-the-world-and-me.jpg" width="200" >}}

Genuinely confused by the success of this book. It honestly read like the book
white people want a black author to write (and no, it's not a compliment _at
all_).

{{</ book >}}

## The Autobiography of Malcolm X

{{< book id="52951822" title="The Autobiography of Malcolm X" name="the-autobiography-of-malcolm-x.jpg" width="200" >}}

A remarkable book by a remarkable human being. What struck me the most is how
honest Malcom X is in his writing. It's raw but doesn't feel unpolished.

**Top Book**.

{{</ book >}}

## The God of Small Things

{{< book id="41059420" title="The God of Small Things" name="the-god-of-small-things.jpg" width="200" >}}

Beautiful, sometimes even magnificent, writing but not enough of a plot for me
to go on with it. I just couldn't connect with the story.

In a way, happy I didn't love this book since the author has gone around saying
insanely islamophobic things since Oct. 7. Less disappointed that way.

{{</ book >}}

## The Dictator's Handbook

{{< book id="58684553" title="The Dictator's Handbook" name="the-dictators-handbook.jpg" width="200" >}}

Hands down the worst political book I have ever read. I struggle to put into
words how bad this is.

**Hard avoid**.

{{</ book >}}

## The New Age of Empire

{{< book id="58014666" title="The New Age of Empire" name="the-new-age-of-empire.jpg" width="200" >}}

Amazing book. It's very well put together and easy to read. Given the complexity
of the topic, that's a remarkable achievement. It is the go-to book I'll
recommend people from now on if they'd like to understand how systemically
racist the world order is.

{{</ book >}}

## Living the Asian Century

{{< book id="198493846" title="Living the Asian Century" name="living-the-asian-century.jpg" width="200" >}}

I have a thing for memoirs that's for sure but Kishore Mahbubani has also a lot
to say about topics I care very much about (the chapter on his time as a
president of the UN Security Council is, alone, worth books of wisdom).

Highly recommended.

{{</ book >}}

## Jumpnauts

{{< book id="176442611" title="Jumpnauts" name="jumpnauts.jpg" width="200" >}}

Very imaginative. First contact is always hard in sci-fi because it's way too
easy to fall into a human-centric trap. I loved the implications of what the
author created and how she let her characters play with the ideas. A profound
yet subtle critique to the "AI fever" as well.

{{</ book >}}

## The Great Convergence

{{< book id="18210749" title="The Great Convergence" name="the-great-convergence.jpg" width="200" >}}

I'm already sure I will read everything Kishore Mahbubani wrote. While I don't
agree with everything he says, I enjoy the clarity and the bluntness of his
writing very much. How much we need to work on the core idea of the book (the
need for a "one world theory") is painfully obvious in October of 2024.

It's a "how we got here, where we are, where we're going" kind of book and
Mahbubani is balanced yet firm in the analysis. The last chapter contains
several suggestions our geopolitical order could use like water in the desert.

{{</ book >}}

## Recognizing the Stranger

{{< book id="208580653" title="Recognizing the Stranger" name="recognizing-the-stranger.jpg" width="200" >}}

A short, intense book. I felt fate was playing me some trick with me as I
pre-ordered the book as soon as I found out about it and I got it on Oct. 7
2024.

Hammad is an incredible writer and I'm gonna have to read more from her soon.

{{</ book >}}

## A Woman is a School

{{< book id="216594557" title="A Woman is a School " name="a-woman-is-a-school.jpg" width="200" >}}

Once in a while I run into a book by complete chance. This was a present and I'm
so grateful this book found its way into my life. By now, it's clear to me I
have a thing for memoirs. This one is beautifully written. Some chapters made me
feel at home (Lebanese culture is so much closer to Neapolitan culture than most
people may realise).

{{</ book >}}

## The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas

{{< book id="92625" title="The Ones Who Walk Away from Omelas" name="the-ones-who-walk-away-from-omelas.jpg" width="200" >}}

A short story that deserves its own commentary. Incredible idea. As the author
said herself she's asking a question. She's not giving any answer. And that's
the beauty of the story.

My answer: Omelas is the west. I read the story through the eyes of colonialism
and racism. It's 2024 so you could argue it's easy to see the world that way.
But the metaphor is so fitting. I'm not explaining it because I don't want to
spoil it.

Must-read.

{{</ book >}}

## The Tech Solution

{{< book id="50166591" title="The Tech Solution" name="the-tech-solution.jpg" width="200" >}}

A good book full of advice. I felt there was not enough of "the tech stuff" in
it while reading it but upon reflection I'm not sure what I was expecting.
There's concrete advice that I intend to follow so definitely worth a read.

{{</ book >}}

## The Island of Missing Trees

{{< book id="61223186" title="The Island of Missing Trees" name="the-island-of-missing-trees.jpg" width="200" >}}

Beautifully written. A difficult love story contextualise in a part of world
history I knew nothing about (somehow, when some historical context is really
fucked up, the story always starts with "the british did this").

{{</ book >}}

## Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac

{{< book id="205645524" title="Memoirs of a Teenage Amnesiac" name="memoirs-of-a-teenage-amnesiac.jpg" width="200" >}}

I needed some “light” read so I picked up Zevin because she writes books that
would make amazing movies. I love the pace and plot development of this one.
Character development felt lighter than I wanted it to be but this was balanced
out by the profound (and beautifully unanswered) questions such a plot
generates.

{{</ book >}}

## Out of Place

{{< book id="22136" title="Out of Place" name="out-of-place.jpg" width="200" >}}

A very intimate memoir. I must confess I got a little tired here and there with
"too much detail". But Said's writing is incredible and some passages very
profound.

{{</ book >}}

## The Hidden Globe

{{< book id="209731336" title="The Hidden Globe" name="the-hidden-globe.jpg" width="200" >}}

It starts really strong (reads like a page-turning novel) but then loses a bit
of strength and rhythm toward the end.

I found the book informative and a good introduction to a subject I knew nothing
about.

{{</ book >}}

## It's Not That Radical

{{< book id="61645827" title="It's Not That Radical" name="its-not-that-radical.jpg" width="200" >}}

The book has immense strength in the early chapters and I loved reading it. It
loses pace a little toward the end but still a fantastic read on a crucial
topic.

{{</ book >}}
