---
tags:
  - golang
date: "2017-02-23T00:00:00Z"
keywords: golang, grafana, influxdb, open source, productivity
title: Building an activity tracker with Go, Grafana, and InfluxDB
---

My routine changed a lot in the past weeks as I stopped going from one meeting
to another; I now spend a lot of time working on my personal laptop. I have a
tendency to procrastinate when I'm alone and I need measurable data to
understand what to improve in my habits. I ran into [rescue
time](https://www.rescuetime.com/) and tried it out for a few days despite
having privacy concerns. The service is helpful and I decided to write a
simplified version of it as an excuse to play around with
[Grafana](http://grafana.org/) and
[InfluxDB](https://github.com/influxdata/influxdb), two open source projects I
like very much. This was my plan:

- Figure out a way to say which application is running in the foreground
- Write a Go program to send this information to InfluxDB once per second
- Let the program run in the background
- Create a dashboard in Grafana to visualise my activities
- Open source the small program and write the article you're reading

## Check what's in the foreground

I really had no idea how to check which application is running in the
foreground, so I did some research. I discovered
[AppleScript](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AppleScript) and scoped my search to
it. Some copy and pasting got me to this
[script](https://gist.github.com/lucapette/41607dfd69f45d70059d029b7b41436f).
Only after having written a working version did I learn that it's possible to
use
[JavaScript](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/releasenotes/InterapplicationCommunication/RN-JavaScriptForAutomation/Articles/Introduction.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014508)
for automation. I will probably rewrite the script in JavaScript before adding
more features, but at the time I already had a working script and decided to
move forward with it.

## The Go program

I wrapped the script with a Go program
[here](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/15fd9d2) and, as usual, I
liked the experience with Go. It's boring, fast and it has a solid standard
library. It was time for the program to send data to InfluxDB, and I installed
it via brew. I couldn't make InfluxDB work as a service at first try and decided
to ignore the problem, I could go back to it later. Then I created a db called
`me` and moved on to the [writing
data](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/guides/writing_data/) guide. The
protocol looked simple, so I decided to copy a small piece of the official Go
client instead of adding a dependency to such a small program. InfluxDB API is
friendly and the code from the client library is easy to adapt; I made it work
in this [commit](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/d6d7e63). The only
noticeable thing to say is that I introduced the concept of categories. The
program figures out the activity name via the AppleScript. Each activity has an
associated category and each category has a score. That's a way of clustering
activities together, e.g. "iTerm2" and "github.com" are associated with
"Development" that has a score of `1`. "Twitter" is associated with "Social"
that has a score of `-1`. The idea is to build a dashboard that quantifies how
productive a day is and which kind of activity I spend my time on. It got a
couple of tries to make it work, I had a little trouble to understand how to
properly send a string as a value. It needed quotes around the value itself and
I had tried things out without reading the documentation. The protocol is
explained in details
[here](https://docs.influxdata.com/influxdb/v1.2/write_protocols/line_protocol_reference/)
and it's a good reminder that reading the documentation before writing the code
can help. Before moving on to the visualisation of the data, I split the
programs in multiple
[files](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/3ef4db8) so that it was
easier to reason about it and I could add some
[tests](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/1235c12).

## Run it in the background

It was time to run `tracker` in the background. I had to get back to the issue
with InfluxDB, so I started reading the logs to understand why it wouldn't start. The fix consisted of one command:

```sh
influxd config > /usr/local/etc/influxdb.conf
```

Probably something was wrong with the brew formula. Normally, I would have
investigated and tried to open a pull request, but I was too excited to get to
the first version of the grafana dashboard. As soon as I tried to visualise the
data, I realised I had understood the InfluxDB data model wrong. The score of
each activity had to be a field and not a tag, otherwise InfluxDB could not
perform any math. It makes sense, and once again I should have read the docs
first. I changed the data model
[here](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/8c96cf7) and I could get an
average score for a given timeframe. At the moment, I'm still using a handmade
configuration for launchd to run `tracker` in the background. I will provide a
brew formula as soon as I'm able to introduce releases.

I left the program running on my machine for a few days so I could test a
grafana dashboard with meaningful data. As soon as I looked at the data, I
realised I needed to add more default categories. I decided to improve how the
program loaded default categories
[here](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/commit/3aedd51) with the help of the
nice little [go-bindata](https://github.com/jteeuwen/go-bindata/) tool. I
embedded a CSV file with more default categories inside the binary. `tracker`
read the content of the file from the binary itself and put the default
categories database in memory. This way the database became easier to extend and
the program was still fast.

## Grafana dashboard

Finally, I could build a dashboard and it looked like this:

Grafana has all the characteristics of a good product: you don't need to read
the documentation to use its interface and if you try things out they just work
most of the times. The documentation is very good anyway, I needed help with the
[table](http://docs.grafana.org/features/panels/table_panel/) panel and the
official documentation was my only source of information.

## What's next?

`tracker` has been an exciting exercise so far. It's amazing how much you can
accomplish and how little effort it takes if you use open source projects like
Grafana and InfluxDB. In my attempt to give back to the open source community, I
will slowly make `tracker` more usable for other people and I will keep taking
notes along the way so I can write other articles about the experience. I
created a [roadmap](https://github.com/lucapette/tracker/projects/1), so it's
easier to understand the direction of the project.

Thank you for reading and stay tuned for the next article!
