---
categories:
  - react
date: "2017-03-16T00:00:00Z"
description: Third article of the series "my journey with React and its ecosystem"
keywords: react, webpack, passata, pomodoro technique
title: First steps with React props and state
---

This article is part of the series [my journey with React and its
ecosystem](/react.html). If you are not familiar with it, I suggest you check
that out first!

## passata design and features

The [pomodoro technique](http://cirillocompany.de/pages/pomodoro-technique) is a
time management technique. I used it in the past and I plan to use it in the
coming months, as it works well for me when I work alone. I don't really need an
application for it, but since I started my journey with React, I decided that
building an application for the pomodoro technique would be a good playground.
Having the pomodoro in my hands, I "processed" it and called my application
[passata](https://github.com/lucapette/passata). I guess my passion for cooking
played its role here.

Here is a list of features I wanted to work on:

- Basic 25-minute timer for a pomodoro and a 5-minute timer for breaks. I don't
  need custom times.
- I want to start a pomodoro by selecting a category ("development", "email",
  "writing" and so on) and then take notes while the pomodoro is running.
- I like graphs, so I want to plot the amount of completed pomodoro and void
  pomodoro (that's how you call a pomodoro when you interrupt it before it
  finishes). Ideally the information is presented by category and by the
  following timeframes: "today", "this/last week" and "custom".

With those requirements in mind, I did some pencil and paper design and ended up
with three screens:

#### Home screen

The home screen presents available categories. I can start a new pomodoro and
access my stats.

![home screen](/img/home.jpg)

#### Run screen

The run screen is shown when a pomodoro is running. I can take notes and
check the progress of the running pomodoro.

![run screen](/img/run.jpg)

#### Rest screen

The rest screen is similar to the run screen but shown after pomodoro
completion. I can read and export my notes, I can start a new pomodoro or get
back to the home screen.

![rest screen](/img/rest.jpg)

I deliberately ignored the graphs view so I could focus on a first working
version of the application.

## A small detour in the webpack world

As soon as I started working on the layout of the application, the size of the
bundle started bothering me. I was sure it did not need to be `5mb` and I
decided to look into it. After all, my journey is a slow learning exercise, so I
can make a detour from time to time.

Webpack documentation has a guide about [code
splitting](https://webpack.js.org/guides/code-splitting/). I assumed it was what
I needed and read the entire guide. I realised I had to understand how this
`chunkhash` thing worked as I saw it in many examples. I guessed it was about
caching, so I read that part of the documentation too. And this was the first
time I felt confused about webpack. I had (and still have as I'm writing about
it) doubts that I couldn't solve by reading the documentation. I did not
understand how to use `chunkhash` from my static `public/index.html`. I read
about manifest files and I started feeling I was digging too deep of a hole. I
decided to focus on css splitting first which I did
[here](http://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/233eaec).

I read the caching guide one more time and the context became clearer to me. I
decided to do a coding session about deploying the application to production
later. Setting up an efficient production build is probably complicated enough
to take up the space of an entire article.

## First experience with props and state

I tried to think about the application in terms of React components. With the
help of a [few](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_D1JGNidMr4)
[video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JPT3bFIwJYA&list=PL55RiY5tL51oyA8euSROLjMFZbXaV7skS)
tutorials and the
[official](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/components-and-props.html)
[documentation](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/state-and-lifecycle.html)
, I came up with the following plan:

- One component holds the current status of the entire application. Using state
  seemed to me a perfect way to deal with "home", "run", and "rest" pomodoro
  screens.
- All the other components have a page prop based on the state, so they can
  re-render themselves accordingly with the current state of the main component.

As soon as I started playing around with the layout, I ran into an issue with
semantic-ui [React components](http://react.semantic-ui.com/introduction). I had
to install `babel-plugin-transform-class-properties` so I could use class
properties syntax for React components. I couldn't find any reference to this
plugin in semantic-ui docs; it was probably just my ignorance. I installed the
plugin in [this](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/4ef66b9) commit.

The developer experience felt nice: every time I got something wrong, the error
messages were helpful. I was particularly impressed when it came to component
props. Only when I read [Typechecking With
PropTypes](https://facebook.github.io/react/docs/typechecking-with-proptypes.html)
in the official React documentation did I understand why the experience was so
nice. `PropTypes` are considered an advanced feature, so you may not run into it
for a while. But it does not matter: you benefit from it every time you work
with a React library that uses the feature. I honestly don't know if it's common
practise to use `PropTypes` as I'm new to the community, but I'm sure it should
be.

While finishing up the first version of the layout, I ran into a strange
semantic-ui bug and opened [an
issue](https://github.com/Semantic-Org/Semantic-UI/issues/5073). It turns out
the bug was a duplicate. I
[wrote](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/9870914) one of those
"temporary workarounds" we make jokes about in the industry, which fixed the
problem at the time.

The code of the [first
version](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/4d2d1f7) of the application
was simple enough. I believe simple solutions are not easy to reach and, since
I'm a complete beginner, I couldn't complain much. I used a `switch` statement
to handle the conditional rendering of content, and somehow it felt a bit
strange. I'm not even sure why. I ran into [10 React
mini-patterns](https://hackernoon.com/10-react-mini-patterns-c1da92f068c5#.huqphpo0x)
and I was delighted to read there was one called "the switching component" for
my use case. I decided to get back to it once my components would look too messy
inside a `switch` statement. I always try to resist abstractions as much as I
can. It pays off most of the time.

At that point, I thought I understood the basics of React state and props.
However, I knew then as well as I know now that the "use state" vs "use props"
dilemma will stick with me for a while. The [React semantic-ui
documentation](http://react.semantic-ui.com/collections/menu) for the Menu
component helped me realise I could simplify the menu using arrays of props
instead of writing each `Menu.Item` by hand in the JSX code. That's a nice and
friendly API: it offers you several possibilities without being intrusive. I'm
not sure it's just semantic-ui React or a common library pattern; I hope it's a
widespread way of rendering children components. In the end, I didn't change it.
I sticked to my favourite programming principle once again: ["Make it work, make
it right, make it fast"](http://wiki.c2.com/?MakeItWorkMakeItRightMakeItFast).
It served me better than any other principle in my career.

As I started feeling comfortable with the basics of React components and
semantic-ui, adding [the content
panel](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/c4566e3) was easy and quick.
I was even satisfied with the appearance of the application despite my terrible
frontend skills. I had a doubt about [the
way](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/commit/c4566e3b749ae17b6c6303c05f81ea6bf798919a#diff-64e27e4d7d4e12ee7eabb7a8b481ead7R59)
I was rendering the content panel, but decided it was good enough for the time
being.

## Make the timer tick

It was time to introduce a timer for the running and resting pomodoro. I did
some research about writing an accurate timer in JavaScript. I knew from past
experience that just summing up elapsed seconds via setTimeout is not accurate.
I found a [great explanation](http://stackoverflow.com/a/29972322/249630) of the
problem with a couple of good working examples. I merged a draft of the timer
based on the answer I found in this [pull
request](https://github.com/lucapette/passata/pull/1).

I called the pull request "Draft of the timer" because I knew I wanted to
extract it to its own class. Here are the next steps:

- Introduce a Timer class so I get to play with ES6 features a bit more.
- Add unit tests for the timer with [jest](https://facebook.github.io/jest/).
- Annotate all the code with [flow](http://flowtype.org) types.

I think that's enough for the next article and I can't wait to get started.

Thank you for reading me and stay tuned for the next article!
