---
categories:
- writing
date: "2016-10-09T00:00:00Z"
description: Some time ago I wrote about my first experiences with journaling. Now,
  it's more than one year I'm doing it and it changed everything
keywords: journaling, day one, writing
title: The real power of journaling
---
I wrote about journaling a [while ago](/what-im-learning-with-journaling). At
the time, I did it because I wanted to go back to writing and share something.
It was a way of unblocking myself. Back then, I did not know where journaling
would take me. I think I did not even know if I wanted to keep doing it.

It turned out I’ve kept doing it daily for more than a year now. I'm enjoying
aspects of it I did not even think about when I started. But let's proceed
with order. The first time I wrote about journaling I used a handmade solution
with vim and some scripting. It worked fine, I wanted to try journaling out
and I did not feel it was right to commit to any application, neither felt I
an actual need to do it. But then I was preparing myself for a long holiday
and I decided it was time to try something new. I bought [day
one](http://dayoneapp.com/) and never looked back. I loved the app from the
first day and I’ve been using it since then.

Day One has a feature I did not understand when I started using the app.  The
feature is simple and maybe even obvious: the app reminds you to have a look
at what you wrote exactly one year ago on the same day. When the app started
notifying me I could now check the feature, I actually did not do it.  I did
not think it was such a big deal. At some point this summer thought, I Decided
to give it a try and it was a revealing experience.

Since university years I’ve always had problems with keeping my weight down to
an acceptable level of self-comfort. Things got much worse in August 2010: I
quit smoking after 14 years of addiction to cigarettes. I got completely out
of shape and started looking into diets, I tried different sports too. After a
long search, I settled for a combination of calories counting and swimming. If
I manage to do both at the same time, the effect on my body is great. Many
times I got close to a body I'm comfortable in. However, I never got to a
point I was constantly tracking calories or going to the swimming pool. I had
a problem - failing to create a habit for those two vital activities in my
life. I was never able to practice them both on a constant basis. Keeping this
in mind, this year I got back to swimming after my summer holidays. I started
recording the experience of swimming outdoors (fantastic opportunity you get
every summer in Berlin) and read what I was doing exactly one year ago. A few
days in this process and I started noticing something interesting. Actually, I
remember thinking "oh, that's funny. I'm writing about the same things I was
writing about one year ago. Such a weird coincidence!".

Of course, this was no coincidence. I tried solving this problem many times
over the last years. I have accumulated lots of data in my head and I never
thought I would have the chance to retrospect over the data. Now, I can
already see the improvements. Because I read what I wrote one year ago. I can
figure out when I stopped swimming or how I felt about some particular aspect
of my life. This is **powerful**. Years go by like days when you become an
adult but they are still 365 days long each. It is a long time for my mind, I
was never able to figure out patterns with my own behaviour. Now I can and I
can correct what I do not like about it. I can at least try.

I feel I will never give up on journaling anymore.  Reading my past self is so
much more interesting than I’ve ever thought it would be. I hope this short
piece of writing encourages you to try journaling yourself!
